---
title: 'Exodus: The Path from Non-Existence - Together Through the Ages'
description: 'Exodus: The Path from Non-Existence - Together Through the Ages'
---

import { Video, Image } from 'ui'

## "Exodus: The Path from Non-Existence" - Together Through the Ages

The Ukrainian and Jewish peoples share a common historical path in the pursuit
of freedom. The project "Exodus: The Path from Non-Existence" aims to
demonstrate this unity and honor all the Righteous who risked their lives for
the sake of others.

<Image src="/assets/events/exodus/01.webp" alt="Sample" />

The art exhibition, which presents the project, started on May 14th in the
symbolic venue - the “Avangard” sports complex, built in Babyn Yar on the site
of the old Jewish cemetery.

<Image src="/assets/events/exodus/02.webp" alt="Sample" />

The place, which was hit by a Russian missile on March 1, 2022, has become a new
memorial to criminal assaults on human life.

<Image src="/assets/events/exodus/03.webp" alt="Sample" />

The exhibition is organized by the Babyn Yar National Historical Memorial
Preserve with the support of the Embassy of the Republic of Lithuania in
Ukraine.

<Image src="/assets/events/exodus/04.webp" alt="Sample" />

The exhibition featured creative projects by the outstanding Ukrainian artist
Matvii Vaisberh's "The Thin Red Line" and Lithuanian artist Daumantas Levas
Todesas' "Moses Wandering".

<Image src="/assets/events/exodus/05.webp" alt="Sample" />

"The Thin Red Line" by Matvii Vaisberh was created after the start of a
full-scale invasion and is dedicated to the defenders of Mariupol, whose
sacrifice defines Ukraine's contemporary path as it fights for its freedom.

<Image src="/assets/events/exodus/06.webp" alt="Sample" />

"Moses Wandering" by Daumantas Levas Todesas represents the path from the
non-existence of the Jewish people.

<Image src="/assets/events/exodus/07.webp" alt="Sample" />

The author was inspired by the almost lost work of Jakovas Bunka "Moses from
Plateliai", he managed to restore it, and gathered dozens of artists from all
over the world around the project, so that each of them could give the sculpture
a new life, tell the story of those who did not accept the position of a slave
and died for freedom.

<Image src="/assets/events/exodus/08.webp" alt="Sample" />

The opening of the exhibition was attended by Valdemaras Sarapinas, the
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Lithuania to
Ukraine.

<Image src="/assets/events/exodus/09.webp" alt="Sample" />

The exhibition was visited by the Righteous Among the Nations.

<Image src="/assets/events/exodus/10.webp" alt="Sample" />

Roza Tapanova, the Head of the Babyn Yar National Historical Memorial Preserve,
along with her colleagues, put significant effort into making the exhibition not
only a significant cultural event but also a place for contemplation on the
shared history of the Ukrainian and Jewish people.

<Image src="/assets/events/exodus/11.webp" alt="Sample" />

<Video
  src="/assets/events/exodus/01.mp4"
  poster="/assets/events/exodus/poster.webp"
/>
