---
title: 'Action Plan to the 70th anniversary of the tragedy of The Babyn Yar '
description:
  'Action Plan to the 70th anniversary of the tragedy of The Babyn Yar '
type: compact
---

import { TextRight, TextCenter } from 'ui'
export const components = { h3: TextCenter, h4: TextRight }

## Action Plan to the 70th anniversary of the tragedy of The Babyn Yar

### CABINET OF MINISTERS OF UKRAINE

### PRIME MINISTER

### In addition to the letter the Ministry of Culture

### from 15.06.11H2 964/13/10-11

**To: Kulyniak M. A., Hryschenko K. D., Tabachnik D. V., Yezhel M. B., Mogilev
A. V.,  Yaroshenko F. O., Yefymenko K. O., Hshzburh O. P., Kurdynovich O. V.,
Paton B. E., Soldatenko V. F., Sechmuk H. M.**

**To the Chairman of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea,**

**To the heads of regional, Kyiv and Sevastopol city state administrations
(according to the list)**

Please ensure the implementation of the Action Plan dedicated to the 70th
anniversary of The Babyn Yar tragedy.

To: Kliuev A. P., Kolesnikov B. V., Khorpshkovskyi V. I., Kravets A. V., Kalinin
I. O.

To the Members of the Organizing Committee on preparation and holding of events,
dedicated to the 70th anniversary of the The Babyn Yar tragedy (according to the
list)

Anistratenko J. C., Avksentev J. A., Dniprov O. S. (Pospelov A. A., Aparshin I.
M.) Latiy G. G.,Tkalenko I. I., Lukyanenko V. E., Kutetskiy V. M.

**DOCUMENT CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT OF THE SECRETARIAT OF THE CABINET OF MINISTERS
OF UKRAINE**

№ 29489/3/1 -11 from 21.06.2011

**APPROVED BY** : The Minister of Culture of Ukraine, Deputy Chairman of the
Organizing Committee on preparation and holding of, dedicated events to the 70th
Anniversary of the Babyn Yar tragedy\
Kulyniak M. A.

**The Working Group of the Organizing committee on preparation and holding of
events, dedicated to 70th Anniversary of the Babyn Yar tragedy**

Levitas Ilya Mikhailovich - President of the National Societies of Ukraine, the
head of the working group

Glazunov Boris Ivanovych - Director of the National Historical Memorial Preserve
"Babyn Yar"

Demchenko Ruslan Mykhailovych - First Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine

Zhebrovskyi Borys Mykhailovych - Deputy Minister of Education, Youth and Sports
of Ukraine

Kohan Tymophiy Grygorovych. - Deputy Minister of Culture of Ukraine

Novohatko Leonid Mykhailovych - Deputy Head of Kyiv City State Administration

Plaksiuk Yuriy Aleksandrovych - Chairman of the State Committee for Television
and Radio Broadcasting of Ukraine

Rabinovich Vadym Zinoviyovych - President of Ukrainian Jewish Congress (by
consent)

Rybak Sergiy Aleksandrovych - Deputy Minister of Finance of Ukraine

**Action Plan, dedicated to the 70th anniversary of the** **of the Babyn Yar
tragedy**

1\. Ensure the nationwide minute of silence.

To the Council of Ministers of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, Kyiv and

Sevastopol city state administrations, regional state administrations (according
to the list)

September 29, 2011

2\. Ensure the ceremony of lowing of the State Flag of Ukraine in front of the
Kiev City Council.

Kyiv City State Administration.

September 29, 2011

3\. Ensure the ceremony of laying of flowers to the Babyn Yar monuments with
participation of the President of Ukraine, Prime Minister of Ukraine, Chairman
of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, Head of Kyiv City State Administration,
representatives of state institutions, NGOs, invited foreign guests.

Kyiv City State Administration, Administration of the President of Ukraine (by
consent)

Secretariat of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, members of Verkhovna Rada of
Ukraine (by consent)

MFA, The Jewish Council of Ukraine, The Babyn Yar memorial fund.

October 3, 2011

4\. Conduct the ceremony of laying of the memorial sign in The Babyn Yar in
confirmation of  the Museum of the The Babyn Yar tragedy construction with
participation of the President of Ukraine, Prime Minister of Ukraine, Chairman
of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, Head of Kyiv City State Administration,
representatives of state institutions, NGOs, invited foreign guests.

Kyiv City State Administration, Administration of thePresident of Ukraine (by
consent)

MFA, Charity Fund "Babyn Yar", The Babyn Yar memorial fund.

3\ October 2011.

5\. Ensure the mourning meeteing near the monument on Dorohozhytska Street. in
Kiev in commemoration of the victims of The Babyn Yar.

Kyiv City State Administration, Council of National Societies of Ukraine, The
Babyn Yar memorial fund.

October 3, 2011

6\. Provide the requiem evening, dedicated to the victims of The Babyn Yar in
the National Opera of Ukraine.

Ministry of Culture, the Kyiv City State Administration, MFA, Ministry of
Education, Science, Youth and Sports, Institute of National Remembrance, State
Committee for Television and Radio Broadcasting of Ukraine.

October 3, 2011

7\. Conduct in Yad Vashem (Israel) concert-requiem on the occasion of 70th
anniversary of the Babyn Yar tragedy in Ukraine with the participation of
National Academic Choir of Ukraine "Dumka" and the National Symphony Orchestra
of Ukraine.

Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

October 8, 2011

8\. Conduct the evening of memory "The Eternal people. The alive people", with
the participation of artists and creative Jewish groups in Ukraine.

Ministry of Culture, the Kyiv City State Administration, The Jewish Council of
Ukraine, The Babyn Yar memorial fund.

October 3, 2011

9\. Show the films about The Babyn Yar tragedy and conduct the creative meeting
with the director of "Babi Yar" movie, Mykola Zasyeyev-Rudenko.

Kyiv City State Administration, Ministry of Culture, The Babyn Yar memorial
fund.

September 2011

10\. Conduct a series of thematic exhibitions:

"Babi Yar - tragedy of Ukraine" – The National Museum of Literature in Ukraine;

"Righteous of Babi Yar" - the National Museum of the Great Patriotic War of
1941\-1945 history;

"The Jewish people in the Great Patriotic War" - the Museum of Books and
Printing of Ukraine;
