---
title: 'Ljudmila Zavorotnaja'
description: 'Ljudmila Zavorotnaja'
type: compact
---

## Ljudmila Zavorotnaja

Ljudmila Zavorotnaja

I saw it firsthand.

Today I received the next issue of "Jewish News." I have read it and could not
sleep, because I was excited about the article “The monument for children, who
where shot at Babyn Yar”. Children were not only killed. I remember, how they
were herded together - a lot of little and elder children, who were covered with
a tarpaulin and poisoned with something in a few minutes!!!

I remember one more story. It was already cold, because winter approached. Near
the Jewish cemetery I was outrun by 15-20 people, who went quickly and silently.
They were attended by the Germans with machine guns. I stopped , because it was
terrible to move on. I came on the Karaite cemetery, and people were moved to
Banyn Yar. Then were gunfire, but screams were not heard. One woman sunk into my
mind – she was in a large plaid scarf, as worn in the villages, and the boy
about 6-7 years. He clung to the woman and cried. Some time later the soldiers
were in a crowd and were talking animatedly.

Not far from me, near Babyn Yar, was a woman from Kurenevka , whose name was
Dasha, and several guys about 12-14 years. If any of them is alive, let them
tell. Perhaps among those guys were Anatolij Kuznecov . All my life, nearly 75
years, I lived on Babyn Yar street, whose name was changed. But why? We, the
residents of this street , will be grateful, if you will give back the
historical name of our street “Babyn Yar”. I and my neighbors feel hurt.

One of the first settlers on Babyn Yar street was my grandfather Kucherovskij
Vasilij Anisimovich. He was at war for eight years before the Revolution, then
he received the George Cross and several medals. When he arrived home, his
parents had already divided the land between their children, so my grandfather
went to Babyn Yar, dug a dug-out, then planted a garden and built a house. His
son, Grigorij Vasil'evich, graduated from the military academy. His surname was
changed (then there was such time). Also he was at war from 1941 to 1945. After
the war he became a lieutenant- colonel. He had a lot of awards, but he was
wounded and lost his eye. Soon he died.

From each house on our street went to the front and were killed about 2-4
people: Shlapakov Il'ja, Mihail Pavel - were killed, Andrew returned crippled
and died. Danilenko Anton Evgen'evich, my stepfather Evgen'ev Mihail, Lysenko
Mihail - my cousin, Bozhenko Mihail, Il'chenko Savelij and Vasilij, Shcherbina
Sergej.

Bystrickij Ivan, Oksanjuk Misha, Zhigulenko Ivan and Dmitrij returned wounded.
My cousin Tkachenko Vasilij went on the war as volunteer at the age of 17. He
was on the war for 8 long years, then he came back and died.

Many cherished, darlings and familiars people were killed!

But the death of innocent children is the most terrible. We can not forget about
it. Let people decide what should be a monument for the children of Babyn Yar.
