---
title: 'Marija Brilijant'
description: 'Marija Brilijant'
type: compact
---

## Marija Brilijant

Marija Brilijant

On the first day of the war young Kiever Briliyant Marija became a warrior of
Komsomol regiment, which took part in the defense of Kyiv. Sergeant Brilijant
was captured under Darnitsa, during the retreat. She was not like a Jew, and it
saved her. POWs were sent to the village Vetovtsy in Perejaslav-Khmelnitskij
region. In the basement sitting commanders and soldiers with sewn on the tunics
Stars of David, with the shaved on the middle of the head hair. Soon they were
all shot.

On the 29th of September Mary with other people was released from the camp as
inhabitants of the occupied territory. All they got document, which were stating
that they were in captivity. The girl did not know that on the same day at Babyn
Yar was killed her mother, Ljubov' Grigor'eva Berljand , sister - Polina
Markovna Ermol'eva with her six year old daughter Tamara.

From the camp, she returned to Kyiv, on Dekabristyv street. She lived her before
the war and get to know about the tragic fate of her family. Neighbors told her
to leave the house immediately.

On the labour exchange, she was sent to the German Reich Commissariat as a
cleaner, but she was fired from there by Hungarians. In the city raids on the
Jews became frequent and friend persuaded Mary to go to Belarus with her.

In commandants office on Shevchenko boulevard girls got documents, those
authorizing departure. They got to Gomel on different trains and parted there.

Mary met Anna Andreevna Panevchik , which got into the spirit of sympathy to
Kiever at the station. She brought her to the district center Bragin, where she
lived with her daughters Zina and Vera and an old grandmother. Anna’s neighbors
suspected that Mary is Jewish. Woman was summoned to the gendarmerie, but the
document about captivity rescued her. To stay in Bragin was dangerous, and Mary
was driven to Gluhovichi village by Anna Andreevna . Mary started to work in a
local farm, which continued to work even during the occupation.

"If I save you, my husband will back," – was guessing believer Anna Andreevna.
And indeed, Ivan Mitrofanovich Panevchik soon returned from captivity.

On the 27th of June, in 1942 Marija Brilijant together with a group of young
people went to the forest from the village Gluhovichi and became a fighter of
detached unit (named after Kalinin) of guerrilla team in Loyev region"For the
Motherland". When the detached unit joined up with the Red Army, Marija fought
in 415th Battalion of airfield service. They victory in Berlin.

Marija Markovna Brilijant the Order of the Patriotic War was awarded and with 17
medals. She became the wife of a war veteran Grigorij Fridman. More than forty
years she worked in the railway post office.

After the war, Marija’s family and the Panevchiks virtually intermarried. Anna
Andreevna kept the house, raised daughters and grandchildren, waited until the
birth of three great-grandchildren. After the death of her husband and two
daughters, she moved to Minsk from Bragin.

In 1996, Anna Andreevna was conferred the title " Righteous Among the Nations “
and in 2003, on the 90th year of life, this kind woman died. Recently, Marija
Markovna was visited by her granddaughter Alena Lemeshchenko and her
great-grandson . The story of simple Belarusian woman, who saved a Jewish girl,
whose family were killed at Babyn Yar does not end.
