---
title: 'Rayisa Majstrenko'
description: 'Rayisa Majstrenko'
type: compact
---

## Rayisa Majstrenko

I was born in Kiev on the 12th of September in 1938. My father, a career officer
Lymarev Vadim Petrovich was Ukrainian, my mother Lymareva Cilja Mironovna was
Jewish.

For me Babyn Yar began even before the war. My mother's parents did not allow
her to marry my father for two reasons: he was not Jewish origin and he had a
son from his first marriage. His first wife had tuberculosis and she died, when
their son was only 9 months. But in a month after the death of his first wife,
my parents were married. We lived with my mother and my half brother Valentin in
the father's family, and at this time my father studied at the Military School
in Poltava. My father's parents story is not also simple.

My grandfather Lymarev Petr was born in Kovel. From the time he was nine years
old, he had been working as a stovemaker. It was a wise man with two classes of
parochial school. He had a small notebook, where he had written orders for many
months in advance. Before the war and after it my grandfather was elected
people's assessor time after time in the Railway area. My grandmother Lymareva
Tetyana was the second wife of my grandfather. Like my grandfather, grandmother
also had no education, but that did not prevent her to be intelligent, smart,
considerate woman with an unusually sensitive and kind heart. She did not have
her own children, but the whole life she saved and raised children: my father,
my younger brothers and sisters, nieces and nephews, my brother and me, my son.

About my mother's family I knew less information. Our families did not
communicate. I only knew that her family was very religious and plentiful.
Grandfather Kovkin Meer came with his family to Kiev from the Jewish town. They
lived on the Batyeva Mount . He worked as a cab driver, he had horses and carts.
My mom communicated with her family, but they did not come to us. Only on the
29th of September in 1941, when I was barely 3 years old, on that fateful day, a
day of judgment for the Jews, to our house on the Saksaganskogo street, 131
arrived a large cart with my mother's relatives. The cart was led by grandfather
Meer.

When in Kyev appeared German leaflets with order for Jews to gather at the
Luk'janovskoe cemetery, people received it as an order to evacuate all Jews from
the city. It was logical, as there was a branch railway line. Grandfather Peter
persuaded my mother did not go to a gathering place. He promised to hide us. But
grandfather’s Meer arrival changed the situation. He believed that the leaflets
were about the Jews’ moving, and convinced my mother to go with them. My mother
agreed with his arguments and bundled quickly. Also she took all documents,
photos, values, throw it all on the cart, seated me and my brother on the cart.
But at the last moment my grandfather Peter took my brother and said us, that he
would bring him, when my mother would arranged and sent address. Grandmother
Tanya went to see us off. According to my grandmother, there were about 18 – 20
people, and no one knew how it all would end.

Our road of death runs across Saksaganskogo street, to the Jewish bazaar (now
Victory Square), followed by the Brest-Litovsk highway, on Kerosinnoj street to
the area of Luk'janovskoe cemetery. People walked, rode on carts, drove baby
carriages with children, and carried old people and patients on blankets,
stretchers. It seemed that all Jewish grief spurtled onto the streets. That
sorrowful column was moving very slowly and stayed often. At the next stop near
the stadium "Start", I distinctly remember myself sitting among the banks of jar
or jam. I was small, and the banks were huge, with wide necks, which were tied
with white rags.

Suddenly I heard some noise, people shouted, ran. I also ran and saw a column of
old people in white. So I called them later "white grandparents." They were in
their underwear, beaten and bloodied. A woman hugging one of them and crying.
She was unglued from him. Grandmother shouted: "Good people, maybe they see each
other the last time!" She took me in her arms and we walked on silently. I
twined around her neck with my little arms and even my mom could not pick me up.
People were depressed and silent.

So we come to the place, where they began to detach families. People shouted and
were rushing in different directions here. Everything happened quickly, Germans
did not stand on ceremony with anybody: people were beaten with batons and rifle
butts. Women and children were taken to one side, men and boys - in another
side. From afar were heard a string of bursts. Columns of people were surrounded
with Germans and policemen.

My grandmother kept about herself a passport. She showed it and shouted: "I am
Russian." My grandmother was a dark-haired and looked Jewish. A policeman ran up
to her and shouted: "Here all are Jews." He hit her with the butt on the ground,
aiming at the same time in my head. But my grandmother had time to lend a
shoulder and fell. Approached German said: "Jude?" The policeman said, "She
said, she is Russian." German grabbed grandmother by the collar, lifted on her
feet and threw her. All this time I was hanging on my grandmother’s neck, and I
narrowly escaped death, because butt did not hit me in the head , but it broke
my grandmother’s shoulder . My grandmother was distracted with pain and fear.
She did not stop to cross herself and shout "I am Russian!" and ran into the
crowd. People gave way to her, forming a corridor, and when grandmother passed
the cordon, she rushed to the cemetery. A 12 year-old girl kept pace with us.
The shooting started, but we were not persecuted. We had been running until we
fell and hid in the bushes among the graves. The girl was with us. Grandmother
hugged us, softly stroked and constantly lamented: "Hush, hush!"

So we were sitting there until dark, and then began to find a way to home.
Grandma knew that area badly, and we wandered in the darkness near the scene of
the tragedy. The girl who was with us, said that she knew where her relatives
were and left. Only at dawn we returned home. My grandmother told me that she
could not come home with me for 3 days. When we were getting into the room, I
started to cry, and she had all this time to stay with me in her arms in the
yard. Fate spared us, I was saved by my grandmother, my father's stepmother, and
all twenty people: Mom, Grandpa Meer, my mother's sisters and their children
remained forever in Babyn Yar. Let they be remembered forever.

During the war, the children grow up early. In my mind clearly postponed that it
was really dangerous to be a Jew. And also the unbearable hunger and cold. When
a bakery factory was bombed, dough flowed on the ground. People picked this
dough up, but grandma Frosja, grandmother’s sister, did not have any place to
put there dough! Without hesitation, she took off her tights and brought that
sour dough in half with the ground for us. What a delicious bread turned out! It
seemed that I had not eaten anything tastier in my life.

After the events at Babyn Yar, we continued to live in our flat on Saksaganskogo
street . We lived in two rooms, in two others lived grandfather's sister Xenia
with her daughter, her son- in-law and three grandchildren. In our two little
rooms except us were living grandma Frosja with an insane grandfather Akim. He
survived, because he came home to wash on the day, when Cyril's hospital
patients were killed,. Also grandmother’s 9-year-old nephew Ljusik and his
sister Galina lived with us.

In our backyard there were two large houses, where were many neighbors who knew
about our tragedy and my nationality. But no one did not issue us. Conversely.
When there were raids, one of the neighbors or the janitor warned us, and we ran
with my grandfather to the basement or the attic. Especially I remember the
basement. We hid among the piles of broken bricks and glass. Usually raid did
not go to the basement, they shot with automaton or threw a grenade. I
distinctly remember the German boots and a barrel of an automaton machine, which
was shooting in the dark.

Often I together with my grandmother went to Darnica and Syrec to find my father
among the prisoners. We brought bread, onion, potato. We could not find father,
but we gave our meager “treats” to hungry people behind a barbed wire.

Adults, everyone in his own way, took part in our survival. Grandma Frosja sewed
clothes for people, grandfather constructed ovens, my grandmother went to the
neighboring villages to change things on the products. From the remaining shreds
grandma Frosja sewed colorful clothes for me and my brother. When adults were
leaving, my brother and I were locked in a room and grandfather Akim in another
one. Sometimes we had to sit indoors for days.

Not always grandmother’s adventures ended good: on the suburbs of Kyiv Germans
and policemen took away something , what was possible to exchange. And the feast
was in the house when out of brought flour grandmother baked unleavened cakes in
a frying pan without fat. They were pierced with a fork not to stuck to the pan.
Then they were broken, crumbled with a bit of garlic, poured with the boiling
water. It was a real feast for our empty stomachs.

Six months before the liberation of Kyiv our district moved into the restricted
area. At night we went to Solomenka to visit grandmother’s nieces and we broke
curfew. We were up for shot because of it. All my life I will remember that
mournful procession. The night was very dark. Grandma Frosja led resisting
grandfather Akim. My brother helped her. We were afraid if Akim cried. Grandpa
carried the cart with our belongings, grandmother pushed it behind, and I
clutched my grandmother’s hemline.

Grandma's nieces Potapova Anna, Potapova Olympiada, Potapova Tamara and a little
son of aunt Lipa,Valerij, lived in two tiny rooms, wich they used as a kitchen,
as a dining room, as a bedroom, and even as the bathroom. They made us feel
welcome. We all slept on the floor, and in the day we spent our time out of the
house. In three one-storey, ramshackle houses crowded about 10 families with a
lot of children. In the yard there were standing several sheds and one common
toilet , which had an adjacent rear wall with a small hill. I climbed in this
slot, when there were raids, or accidentally came Germans and policemen. I was
afraid of the big, black spiders in this slot, but one fear won another.

On the eve of the arrival of our troops Germans expelled all residents of Kyiv.
They wanted to leave behind a dead city. On that day we were sitting in the
hallway of our suitcases, waiting our fate and deciding: "To leave or not to
leave?" The door opened, and the Germans went into the hallway. Tall officer
shouted something angrily. Interpreter banged his fist on the table and too
loudly said: "That's right, get out of one door, the go into another one, but do
not go away from Kyiv. Tomorrow there will be ours. "The officer patted him on
the shoulder: "Gut, Gut."

The same night we got home on Saksaganskogo street. Here gathered a lot of
neighbors. Janitor Petro Ivanovych closed the gates with a help of a huge
padlock. Adults were happily excited and scared at the same time. They gathered
in one room, and we, children, were seated on the bed in the hallway. But we
could not sit still. We hopped on the linked fabric, squealed, rejoiced.

Nobody noticed the explosions and fire outside the gate. At the gates constantly
knocked, but the janitor forbidden to approach them. Only at dawn the silence
came. Someone shouted: "Our!" We rushed onto the street. Near the gate in the
basement there were half-naked corpses of Germans. A Soviet tank stood in front
of the house. Tanker , who was standing in the hatch, was without a helmet. He
wiped the sweat from his face and asked how to get to Stalinka. People
surrounded the tank, touched it, touched a tanker. Grandmother stood and cried.
She kept me in her arms and wrapped me in a handkerchief. Tanker offered his
hand to us , and I was lifted by my grandmother into his hand. He took me
carefully, pressed to unshaven cheek and kissed. Thus the occupation finished
for us.

But my hungry and cold childhood did not finish. Grandpa was constantly ill,
because he got cold at the drafts in apartments where he laid the oven. That
fact reflected in the budget, as our grandfather was the only breadwinner.

My father was listed as missing till 1945. He got a packet in the chest in 1942
at the suburbs of Stalingrad and all this time he was under treatment somewhere
in hospitals in Russia. He did not know that my mother died, but he married a
nurse who nursed him. When my father found out that my mother was dead, he
brought his new wife to Kyiv, where she gave birth to a baby girl. They did not
live with us. They had three children, so my brother and I grew up with our
grandparents.

My childhood with toys, clothes and a good meal finished with the advent of war.
The rest of my life was in perpetual poverty. When my grandmother took me to the
first class, we were sent back as I looked four year old child. My hands, which
were frozen in time of war , were always red and aroused disgust at my more
affluent peers. I was always hungry. Even getting married, I had only school
uniform and prom dress, which was sewn by grandma Frosja.

But thanks to my grandparents I'm alive. I have a husband and two children. My
son is a stuntman and a stunt coordinator. My daughter is a ballet dancer. I and
my husband are a former ballet dancers and we are working as the leaders of
children's company "Obolon", where are dancing more than 200 children. May God
give our children and grandchildren will never survive that we got at our fate!
