---
title: 'Yakiv Kaper'
description: 'Yakiv Kaper'
type: compact
---

## Yakiv Kaper

Yakiv Kaper

About 29 - 30 September ,1941 prisoners were started moving out from our camp to
the Babyn Yar where they were shot. I was in the last car, but in the Lukyanivka
estate I jumped on the move and fell on the full of corpses road. I could not
hide. I was caught by the Brownshirts in Pushha-Vodycya and was sent to the
Gestapo, and then to Kiev camp for Jews on Instytutska street.

After two months along with five other prisoners I were taken to work in the
so-called school of police on the Miller Str., 48. As in the camp, the
conditions were inhumane there. Autumn, in September - October 1942, I and three
prisoners - Budnik Davyd , Ostrovskyj Leonid, Vilkis Pylyp – was put in the gas
van and taken to the concentration camp Syrecz, where we were until August
1943.We saw as Brownshirts took prisoners to the camp and shot them.

In August 1943 we were shackled and forced to pull corpses out from the pits, to
build special burners and to cremate them there. We were put in the dugout.
Sonderkommando’s Germans were cruel with us. We stayed overnight on the damp
ground. There were more than 300 people in the dugout. After excavation we
pulled corpses out with special hooks. Then we stacked them in the burner, which
was built of tombstones, rails, twigs and wood, poured with oil, firmly against
each other. Burners were set afire and then they burnt more than one day. In the
same time we were forced to built new burners elsewhere in the ravine. The same
thing recurred again with great frequence.

After cremation of corpses, we crushed survivors bones with mortars, bolted
them, mixed with sand and sprinkled it with ash to flatten a road. Prisoners
were forced to pull gold teeth out of corpses before their cremation.

I saw the gas van came to the ravine, stayed for a few minutes with the running
engine, and then we were forced to unload corpses from this machine and throw
them into the burner. Often people were thrown into the fire alive. In such
cases cries and moans sounded. People were brought in ravines by cars and were
shot there without not being gassed. Corpses were burned. Civilians, guerillas
and Soviet volunteers were killed and shot in gas vans and at the Babyn Yar.

I and other prisoners were about two months at the Babyn Yar. About 120 000
corpses were cremated during this time. We were cosigned to death, so the last
burner we built for us.

Although we were under the powerful guard of Nazis, we got ready to escape to
freedom. Prisoner Yershov inspired us to do it. Among the corpes, I found the
key that fits to the lock of our dugout. September 29, 1943 we opened the lock
and flied at the guard. Only 10-15 people of 300 prisoners cracked and escaped.
Others died not far from the dugout. Except me, stayed alive Davydov, Steyuk and
others.
