---
title: 'Babyn Yar: A Living Memory of Tragedy and a Symbol of Resilience'
description: 'Babyn Yar: A Living Memory of Tragedy and a Symbol of Resilience'
---

## Babyn Yar: A Living Memory of Tragedy and a Symbol of Resilience

The National Historical and Memorial Reserve “Babyn Yar,” located in Kyiv, is a
unique space of living memory where the tragic pages of history unfold under
three totalitarian regimes: Nazi, Soviet, and the ongoing Russian aggression.
This site preserves the memory of Holocaust victims, the man-made Kureniivka
disaster, and Ukraine’s current struggle for freedom.

### A Place of Many Voices

In September 1941, Babyn Yar became one of the Holocaust’s earliest “gates of
hell.” Over two days, more than 33,000 Jews were executed in what stands as the
largest single massacre of Jews during World War II. This tragedy marks the
beginning of the Holocaust as a systematic extermination of the Jewish people by
the Nazis.

The tragedy of Babyn Yar extends beyond its Jewish victims. During the
occupation, the site also bore witness to the execution of Romani communities,
Ukrainian patriots, prisoners of war, children, individuals with mental
illnesses, and people of various nationalities and cultures.

After the war, the Soviet regime sought to erase the memory of these events by
turning Babyn Yar into a site for construction and industrial waste. This
disregard culminated in the Kureniivka disaster of 1961, when a dam collapse
swept away hundreds of lives, transforming the site once again into a symbol of
neglected memory and human tragedy.

### Modern Challenges: War and Propaganda

In 2022 and 2023, Russian bombings inflicted significant damage on the Babyn Yar
memorial grounds. Lives were lost in the vicinity, underscoring the threat
totalitarian regimes pose to memory, culture, and freedom.

### The Mission of Babyn Yar

Today, Babyn Yar serves as a space that brings people and communities together.
Here, the memory of past tragedies becomes a powerful tool for dialogue,
historical preservation, and the fight for justice. Special attention is given
to amplifying the voices of communities that have long been silenced.

The reserve’s “Living Memory” Exhibition Center hosts exhibitions, discussions,
and educational projects that examine historical lessons and their relevance to
the present day.

Address: 46A Yuriy Illienko Street\
Hours: Daily from 10:00 AM to 7:00 PM\
Admission: Free

### International Recognition

On December 11, 2024, during the 19th session of the Committee for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict held at UNESCO
headquarters in Paris, the National Historical and Memorial Reserve "Babyn Yar"
was granted enhanced protection status under the 1954 Hague Convention and its
Second Protocol of 1999.
